Add user guide on how to use the compiler (#114)
NVIDIA/TensorRT-Incubator: tripy/docs/pre0_user_guides/02-compiler.md

# Using the Compiler

```{contents} Table of Contents
:depth: 3
```

## Walk through model compilation and deployment

Let's walk through a simple example of a [GEGLU](https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05202v1) module defined below:

```py
# doc: no-eval
class GEGLU(tp.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_out):
        self.proj = tp.Linear(dim_in, dim_out * 2)
        self.dim_out = dim_out
    
    def __call__(self, x):
        proj = self.proj(x)
        x, gate = tp.split(proj, 2, proj.rank - 1)
        return x * tp.gelu(gate)
```

> To naively run `GEGLU` in eager mode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run `GEGLU` in eager mode:
```

```py
# doc: no-eval
layer = GEGLU(2, 8)
inp = tp.ones((1, 2))
out = layer(inp)
print(out)
```

Now, let's try to optimize this model for inference using Tripy's Compiler.

> First, let's initialize the compiler with `layer` which lets the `Compiler` know the properties of the function we are compiling (e.g. function signature).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, let's initialize the compiler with the module we want to compile, `layer`, which lets the `Compiler` know its properties, like the function signature.
```

> First, let's initialize the compiler with `layer` which lets the `Compiler` know the properties of the function we are compiling (e.g. function signature).

Reviewer: Could we write it as either just:
```
compiler
```
Or:
```
{class}`Compiler`
```

The latter will link to the API docs

```py
# doc: no-eval
compiler = tp.Compiler(layer)
```

> Next, we need to provide information about each input using `tp.InputInfo`. The first argument for `InputInfo` is `shape`, where we specify either the static or dynamic shape information for each dimension. In the example below, we assume the shape of `inp` is static (`(1, 2)`). The second argument specifies the `dtype` for the input:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we need to provide information about each input using {class}`InputInfo`. The first argument for `InputInfo` is `shape`, where we specify either the static or dynamic shape information for each dimension. In the example below, we assume the shape of `inp` is static (`(1, 2)`). The second argument specifies the `dtype` for the input:
```

```py
# doc: no-eval
inp_info = tp.InputInfo(shape=(1, 2), dtype=tp.float32)
```
Now, we can call the `compile` function to obtain a compiled function and use it for inference:

```py
# doc: no-eval
fast_geglu = compiler.compile(inp_info)
print(fast_geglu(inp))
```

### Optimization profiles

> In the example above, we assumed `inp` has a static shape of `(1, 2)`. Now, let’s assume that the shape of `inp` can vary from `(1, 2)` to `(16, 2)`. To express this constraint to the compiler, we can provide the range of shapes to `InputInfo` using `shape=((1, 8, 16), 2)`. This indicates to the compiler that the first dimension can vary from 1 to 16, and it should optimize for performance based on 8.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above, we assumed `inp` has a static shape of `(1, 2)`. Now, let’s assume that the shape of `inp` can vary from `(1, 2)` to `(16, 2)`, with `(8, 2)` being the shape we'd like to optimize for. To express this constraint to the compiler, we can provide the range of shapes to `InputInfo` using `shape=((1, 8, 16), 2)`. This indicates to the compiler that the first dimension can vary from 1 to 16, and it should optimize for a size of 8.
```

```py
# doc: no-eval
inp_info = tp.InputInfo(shape=((1, 8, 16), 2), dtype=tp.float32)
fast_geglu = compiler.compile(inp_info)
print(fast_geglu(inp))

# Let's change the shape of input to (2, 2)
inp = tp.Tensor([[1., 2.], [2., 3.]], dtype=tp.float32)
print(fast_geglu(inp))
```

### Errors for out of bounds inference

> If the user provides input that does not comply with the dynamic shape constraint given to the compiler, `Tripy` will produce an error with relevant information:

Reviewer: Let's keep the voice consistent:
```suggestion
If we provide an input that does not comply with the dynamic shape constraint given to the compiler, tripy will produce an error with relevant information:
```

```py
# doc: no-eval

> from tests import helper

Reviewer: Can we avoid the internal helper? We can add a `# doc: allow-exception` tag or something like that instead. That way the text of the exception can also be appended automatically

# E                 | 
# E       
# E           --> /tripy/tripy/frontend/ops/tensor_initializers.py:57 in ones()
# E                 |
# E              57 |     return full(shape, 1, dtype)
# E                 |            ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ --- required from here
# E       
```

### Serializing the executable to disk

A compiled executable can be serialized to disk and then used for deployment.

Saving an executable to disk:

```py
# doc: no-eval
import tempfile, os
temp_dir = tempfile.mkdtemp()
executable_file_path = os.path.join(temp_dir, "executable.json")
fast_geglu.save(executable_file_path)
```

Reading an executable and running inference:

```py
# doc: no-eval
inp = tp.Tensor([[1., 2.], [2., 3.]], dtype=tp.float32)
loaded_fast_geglu = tp.Executable.load(executable_file_path)
print(loaded_fast_geglu(inp))
os.remove(executable_file_path)
```

### Querying properties of the executable

You can also query properties about the executable:

```py
# doc: no-eval
loaded_fast_geglu.get_input_info()
# [ArgInfo(shape_bounds=((1, 16), (2, 2)), dtype=float32)]

loaded_fast_geglu.get_output_info()
# [ArgInfo(shape_bounds=((1, 16), (8, 8)), dtype=float32)]
```

> ## Expectations for pure functions

Reviewer: Maybe call it:
```suggestion
## Common Pitfalls
```
And we can add more things later

Tripy expects that the functions that will be compiled are pure functions with no side effects. Consider this example:

```py
# doc: no-eval
def add_times_two(a, b):
    c = a + b

>     print(c)

Reviewer: I'm trying to think of ways to make this better - one idea I had was to mark tensors as being for tracing only. Any operations that take any tracing-only inputs will generate all tracing-only outputs (we can maybe do that in the build function). In` __repr__` we can emit an error if the tensor is supposed to be tracing only

Author: @pmarathe25  I am resolving this comment to merge the MR, will file an issue to discuss this further.

print(fast_geglu(inp))
```

### Errors for out of bounds inference
If the user provides input that does not comply with the dynamic shape constraint given to the compiler, `Tripy` will produce an error with relevant information:

```py
# doc: no-eval
from tests import helper

inp = tp.ones((32, 2), dtype=tp.float32)
def test_oob(self):
        with helper.raises(tp.TripyException, match="Unexpected tensor shape."):
            fast_geglu(inp).eval()

# E       Unexpected tensor shape.
# E           For parameter `x`, expected the tensor shape `shape(32, 2)` to be within bounds for all dimensions. However, dimension 0 has a shape of 32, which is not within the expected bounds of (1, 16). Note: The provided argument was: 
# E       
# E           --> /tripy/tripy/frontend/trace/ops/fill.py:121 in full()
# E                 |
# E             121 |     return full_impl(shape, value, dtype, output_rank)
# E                 | 
# E       
# E           --> /tripy/tripy/frontend/ops/tensor_initializers.py:57 in ones()
# E                 |
# E              57 |     return full(shape, 1, dtype)
# E                 |            ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ --- required from here
# E       

> ```

Reviewer 2: Is is possible to render the error message in a dynamic way?

Author: Done in the latest iteration.

os.remove(executable_file_path)
```

### Querying properties of the executable

You can also query properties about the executable:

```py
# doc: no-eval
loaded_fast_geglu.get_input_info()
# [ArgInfo(shape_bounds=((1, 16), (2, 2)), dtype=float32)]

loaded_fast_geglu.get_output_info()
# [ArgInfo(shape_bounds=((1, 16), (8, 8)), dtype=float32)]
```

## Expectations for pure functions

Tripy expects that the functions that will be compiled are pure functions with no side effects. Consider this example:

```py
# doc: no-eval
def add_times_two(a, b):
    c = a + b
    print(c)
    return c + a + b

compiler = tp.Compiler(add_times_two)
inp_info = tp.InputInfo(shape=(1, 2), dtype=tp.float32)
fast_myadd = compiler.compile(inp_info, inp_info)
a = tp.Tensor([[1.0, 2.0]], dtype=tp.float32)
b = tp.Tensor([[2.0, 3.0]], dtype=tp.float32)

print(fast_myadd(a, b))
```

You would expect that the output is `[6.0, 10.0]` and `c` gets evaluated to `[3.0, 5.0]`. But if you run the above program, the output will be :
```
# doc: no-eval
tensor(
    [[2.0000, 2.0000]], 
    dtype=float32, loc=gpu:0, shape=(1, 2))
tensor(
    [[5.0000, 7.0000]], 
    dtype=float32, loc=gpu:0, shape=(1, 2))

> ```

Reviewer 2: `# doc: no-eval` is not needed here as it's not a python block.

# Using the Compiler

```{contents} Table of Contents
:depth: 3
```

## Eager Mode vs. Compile Mode

Tripy offers two modes of operation: eager mode and compile mode:

### Eager Mode

Eager mode is designed for development and debugging purposes:

> 1. **Deferred Compilation**:  In eager mode, compilation is deferred until the first use of a tensor, allowing for easier debugging.

Reviewer 3: Should we specify that "Eager mode" performs Lazy evaluation i.e. "Deferred compilation" and an execution?
We use "Lazy evaluation" in a couple of docs/comments so it would be better to define it formally and link it with "Eager mode".

Author: I removed this section from the guide.

2. **Fast Compilation**: It utilizes specific settings (`builder_optimization_level`) in the TensorRT compiler to skip most optimizations, resulting in faster compilation times.
3. **Debugging**: Eager mode is particularly helpful when debugging models that are being developed using Tripy APIs.
4. **Immediate Feedback**: It allows for quick iterations and immediate feedback, which is beneficial during the model development phase.

### Compile Mode

Compile mode is focused on optimization and deployment:

1. **Full Optimization**: Users can leverage the full power of TensorRT's optimizations to improve model's performance.
2. **Model Serialization**: Compile mode allows users to serialize the compiled model, enabling deployment and distribution.

> 3. **Dynamic Shape Support**: Provides the ability to specify a range of shapes for all inputs, allowing for optimized execution across different input sizes.

Reviewer 2: Part of these looks duplicate with "An introduction to Tripy", like sections "Lasy evaluation" and "To compile or not to compile". Maybe this part is better merged with those sections, and `compiler.md` only focuses on how to use `tp.compile`.

Author: Removed in the latest iteration.

## Walk through model compilation and deployment

Let's walk through a simple example of a [GEGLU](https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05202v1) module defined below:

```py
# doc: no-eval
class GEGLU(tp.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_out):
        self.proj = tp.Linear(dim_in, dim_out * 2)
        self.dim_out = dim_out
    
    def __call__(self, x):
        proj = self.proj(x)
        x, gate = tp.split(proj, 2, proj.rank - 1)
        return x * tp.gelu(gate)
```

To naively run `GEGLU` in eager mode:

```py

> # doc: no-eval

Reviewer 2: I see all code sections are `# doc: no-eval`, is this intended?

Author: Yes, no eval means that the doc rendering does not need to execute the code but it is still tested.

Reviewer: Why do we not want it to execute code? IMO it's nice to see the output

layer = GEGLU(2, 8)
inp = tp.ones((1, 2))
out = layer(inp)
print(out)
```

> Now, lets try to optimize this model for inference using Tripy's Compiler.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, let's try to optimize this model for inference using Tripy's Compiler.
```

> First, lets initialize the compiler with `layer` which lets the `Compiler` know the properties of the function we are compiling (e.g. function signature).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, let's initialize the compiler with `layer` which lets the `Compiler` know the properties of the function we are compiling (e.g. function signature).
```

```
Next, we need to provide information about each input using `tp.InputInfo`. The first argument for `InputInfo` is `shape`, where we specify either the static or dynamic shape information for each dimension. In the example below, we assume the shape of `inp` is static (`(1, 2)`). The second argument specifies the `dtype` for the input:

```py
# doc: no-eval
inp_info = tp.InputInfo(shape=(1, 2), dtype=tp.float32)
```
Now, we can call the `compile` function to obtain a compiled function and use it for inference:

```py
# doc: no-eval
fast_geglu = compiler.compile(inp_info)
print(fast_geglu(inp))
```

### Optimization profiles

In the example above, we assumed `inp` has a static shape of `(1, 2)`. Now, let’s assume that the shape of `inp` can vary from `(1, 2)` to `(16, 2)`. To express this constraint to the compiler, we can provide the range of shapes to `InputInfo` using `shape=((1, 8, 16), 2)`. This indicates to the compiler that the first dimension can vary from 1 to 16, and it should optimize for performance based on 8.

```py
# doc: no-eval
inp_info = tp.InputInfo(shape=((1, 8, 16), 2), dtype=tp.float32)
fast_geglu = compiler.compile(inp_info)
print(fast_geglu(inp))

> # Lets change the shape of input to (2, 2)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Let's change the shape of input to (2, 2)
```
